last week Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu stood before the US
Congress in Washington and put the
regime in Iran and its proxy Fighters
Hezbollah and Hamas on notice now it
wasn't a declaration of war but it was
as close as against the word ceasefire
was not uttered not even once since then
two men a Hezbollah commander and the
political leader of Hamas have been
killed Iran is blaming Israel and vowing
revenge the us today said that it had no
knowledge and no involvement in the
killings how is that possible tonight
America's influence over Israel it looks
Mighty weak netanyahu's ability to keep
his word does not I'm Brink off in
Berlin this is the
[Music]
[Applause]
day Israel will exact a heavy price for
any aggression against us from any
Arena we condemn this brutal and painful
[Music]
operation is a great news and I think it
was It was supposed to happen I consider
what happened in Iran to be a conspiracy
he met with the Iranian president and
then an Israeli attack happened I'm not
going to speculate on what impact any
one event
uh might
[Music]
have also coming up and trying for the
positive spin the US says an escalation
of the Middle East conflict is not
inevitable and that a ceasefire between
Israel and Hamas is still possible I
think it's too soon to know what any of
these reported events uh could mean for
the ceasefire deal um but if I could add
two points one is that doesn't mean
we're going to stop working on it in
fact we have a team in the region right
now as we speak uh to try to continue to
work with our counterparts to move this
forward because it's that
[Music]
important to our viewers watching on PBS
in the United States and to all of you
around the world welcome we begin the
day with an angry and humiliated Iranian
regime vowing to take revenge against
Israel on Wednesday Iran announced the
death of one of its closest allies a top
Hamas leader Ismael hania an
assassination on Iranian soil that the
regime immediately blamed on Israel Ania
was in tyan to attend the inauguration
of the newly elected Iranian president
he was reportedly killed in a pre-dawn
air strike that could end up triggering
an allout war in the Middle East after
the October 7th Terror attacks last year
Israel pledged to kill Hanan and other
Hamas leaders but today Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin n yahu said nothing of
hania's death but he said Israel will
exact a heavy price for any aggression
against it on any front in tyan we can
only imagine the shock and disbelief an
air strike that targeted a Hamas leader
inside the Iranian Capital has revealed
massive failures by Iran's intelligence
and its Republican National Guard add a
new president to the equation along with
a regime that's still cracking down on
domestic descent and you have a
full-fledged crisis in the Islamic
Republic for its leaders and for those
proxy groups that allow Iran to wield
power across the Middle
East Ismael hania greets Iran's new
president in what would be one of his
last
meetings just hours after attending the
president's inauguration he and his
bodyguard were killed in a strike on his
residence in
tyan we condemn brutal and painful
Operation God willing with the efforts
of the security forces a report will be
given to the people as soon as
possible my request is that necessary
Works be done so that those responsible
don't feel like they can hurt
us at the time of his death Han was the
political face of Hamas the militant
islamist group that carried out the
October 7th Terror attacks on Israel
Hamas Fighters killed around 1200 people
and took more than 250 others hostage
nearly half of whom are still held in
Gaza Hana had not lived in Gaza for
several years but ran Hamas from qat
where he lived in
Exile born near a Gaza City refugee camp
the 62-year-old was the child of
Palestinian refugees from the village of
Alura near
Ashkelon he joined Hamas when it was
founded in
1987 and was arrested and jailed by
Israel during the first in the uprising
against Israeli
occupation Hano was exiled to Lebanon
but he returned to Gaza following the
1993 Oslo Peace
Accords he became the Palestinian prime
minister in 2006 and continued to rise
through hamas's ranks eventually
becoming its political Chief in 2017
while hamas's Gaza leader Yahya sinoa is
believed to have been The Mastermind of
the October 7th attacks Ania was seen as
a more moderate force in
Hamas he has lost several of his own
family members in Israeli attacks on
Gaza which have killed nearly 40,000
people since then three of hania's sons
and four of his grandchildren were
killed in
April at the time time hania insisted
their deaths would not affect ongoing
ceasefire and hostage
talks hania represented Hamas
internationally and moved around the
region for diplomatic meetings he was a
key player in negotiations to stop the
fighting in Gaza some fear his killing
will be a major setback in achieving
peace in the
region well Israel has not claimed
responsibility for hania's killing but
its prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
spoke today about an earlier strike on
Beirut that killed a Hezbollah leader
fan shuker he said that killing and
others had shown that Israel had
delivered crushing blows to all of our
enemies Netanyahu said that his country
is ready for whatever lies
ahead citizens of Israel challenging
days lie
ahead since the strike in Beirut there
are threats sounding from all
directions we are prepared for any
scenario and we will stand United and
determined against any threat Israel
will exact a heavy price for any
aggression against us from any
Arena my first guest served 25 years in
Israel's defense intelligence community
that includes being head of its Iran
research Branch he's now with the
Atlantic Council and specializes in the
Middle East National Security and
intelligence I'm happy to welcome back
to the program Danny covitz Danny it's
good to see you again it's good to have
you um on the program you know as well
as I do the Middle East has been a
powder keg for a long time what do these
two killings at the top of hisbah and
Hamas what do they mean for the risk of
an allout wider War breaking
out well again thank you for having me
and uh I think that uh as described I
think rightly so uh we are on the verge
of uh severe escalation and even a
regional War I think those two events
are putting us closer and closer it's
not only those two events but the
threats coming out from Teran and
tomorrow we'll hear probably Secretary
General kasan ASA talking about that as
well and I think that we are if uh
something it won't be contained in a way
that uh maybe inter intervened by the us
or other Regional superpowers I think
that escalation is almost imminent and I
think that uh we are close as we ever
been to a direct clash between Israel
andala and definitely between Israel and
Iran the closest that you've ever been
what needs to happen immediately to pull
both sides back from the brink in your
opinion unfortunately I am not uh
verying of good news I think there is no
not not a thing that someone can take or
do in order to to prevent the reaction
uh from Iran andala the retaliation
against Israel for the killing of for
shukur and isia I think that Israel will
have to absorb the strike and then
hopefully it will foil most of the
attack like what happened 14th of April
and then if we're able to foil it then
we'll maybe retaliate a limited response
and maybe we can contain it but the real
problem is the fact that it's not only
only even if we contain the current
situation we have to remember that
without the ceasefire in Gaza the
tension will continue and while both
sides or or all sides playing with fire
I think it's uh safe to assume that even
if we contain the cor escalation the
future one is just around the corner so
but we are in a very vle situation and I
hope that after the retaliation of his
and Iran and it will be a retaliation I
think they climbed on the tree and they
said that they will retaliate I hope
then the International Community will
intervene pressuring both sides to
contain a future retaliation because if
not escalation like I mentioned imminent
and without someone that will be at the
end of the day will be able to contain
the current situation we'll find
ourselves in a in a full stage war that
nobody wants but I think we are very
close to be there well the Israeli Prime
Minister last week when he spoke in
Washington um he gave a very long speech
he did not mention the word ceasefire
once in his speech speech and I know
that Israel promised after the October
7th Terror attacks to kill you know
hania and other Hamas leaders but hania
was also one of the main pointman one of
the main people involved in the
negotiations about a possible ceasefire
and also about a possible hostage deal
so it doesn't look that like Israel
really wants that ceasefire to to take
place is that your read on what
Netanyahu
wants well uh again it's very hard for
me it's easier really to analyze Iran
than trying to analyze the Israeli
political system especially Nan but I
would say this I think that uh isia from
the 7th of October it was obvious that
Israel will paino it or him but the main
problem right now is like you mention is
the fact that we have no other choice in
that regard in terms of reaching at
ceasefire and I'm not sure that killing
isma Andia will get us closer uh through
this promised land in terms of reaching
that agreement hania run the negotiation
from Kamas cter I think unlike C he was
interested in in a deal uh again he is
not a good man he is a terrorist a very
bad man but if you want to release our
hostages I think that killing uh Ania
I'm not sure it's getting us closer to
where we want to be I think now we'll
have to wait until the will point a new
guy hopefully a one that will push for a
deal so the B line of things I think
killing an in general terms after 7th of
October something Israel inspired to do
but for in the current situation I'm not
sure that killing him will promote deal
on unfortunately I think that it will
aall one but we'll have to wait and see
what's uh how things will develops the
future but I'm I'm sadly I'm very
pessimistic for the chances for a deal
in the current weeks and even months you
you say that you're not that killing
hania is is going to be um productive
for Israel or for getting a ceasefire
the United States the Secretary of State
said today that the US had no knowledge
of the plan to kill Ania and also was
not involved in the plan that's hard to
believe but if that is the truth what
does that tell us then about the
relationship between Israel and its most
important Ally the United States and
what does it tell us also about
Washington's ability
to influence
Israel well I think uh both countries of
course have strong cooperation between
them but both are independent I think
Israel has it Independence to take the
relevant decision in order to improve
its security uh but it goes with that
saying that Israel will need us backup
especially if we are deteriorating into
a war and that is why I think it's
imperative to make sure that the
American Administration know what Israel
wants to do know what how Israel wants
things to be developed and I think we
will be highly dependent on them after
retaliation whether going to war or
using the US to contain or to pressure
Iran and kisala through the Lebanese
government not to escalate even further
so I think in that regard I don't think
it's an indication how strong the co
cooperation is or connection is I think
it's quite strong but I think in that
regard I think the administration is
highly worried that what Israel is doing
right now will deterior the situation
into a full scale war and I think they
will pressure all sides to contain their
activities towards the future okay Danny
sovit as always we appreciate your time
appreciate your valuable analysis
tonight thank
you thank you very
[Music]
much well immediately after the air
strike on Wednesday morning Iran vowed
to take revenge for the killing of
Ismael hania now he had come to tan for
the inauguration of Iran's new president
masud peshan the president today said
that Iran will quote defend its
territorial Integrity dignity honor and
pride and will make the terrorist
occupiers regret their cowardly act and
in a statement read out on Iranian
television the country's supreme leader
Ayatollah alih hamani directly
threatened Israel claiming that it had
laid the ground for a harsh punishment
and it was tyron's duty to seek revenge
for The Killing of
is well for more I'm joined Now by Ali
fah Nan director of the center for
Middle East and Global Order he joins me
tonight from right here in Berlin it's
good to see you again Iran promising to
punish Israel but within Iran's
leadership after the killing of hania in
tan do you think that there will be
consequences for this failure in
intelligence and National Security
inside Iran
well in terms of consequences I'm not
sure uh but then again it's very clear
that there have been such uh deficits
and huge deficits in terms of uh
providing Security in terms of air
defenses uh and it's quite a humiliation
for the Iranian side after all hania was
a top regime guest uh going to tan to
attend the inauguration of the the new
Iranian president masud pesan and also
meeting uh together with the head of the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad um with the
supreme leader of Iran Ali but then um
you know the so powerful Islamic
Republic of Iran was not able to protect
uh one of his key allies and one of his
top guests so there is a lot of pressure
now um to you know in Iran to respond uh
to that killing yeah Iran has valed to
take revenge um do we know what that
could possibly look
like well if the New York Times report
that was just published an hour or so
ago is correct um uh this morning when
there was an emergency meeting of the
Supreme National Security Council which
is an elite buddy tasked to deal with uh
vital National Security and foreign
policy issues uh at this meeting uh
supreme leader Ali according to the New
York Times and its sources um has
ordered um Iran to strike Israel
directly so if this of course would
present uh you know a huge escalation uh
potentially uh but then again we may see
um what we saw what we saw on April 13th
uh with the uh unprecedented direct
assault by Iran and Israel uh which U
you know there's a lot of confusion
about that but after you know at the end
of the day the Israelis together with
the support of the United States and its
Regional Partners were able to uh defend
uh Israel uh quite uh strongly so maybe
uh this kind of uh you know scenario
going to be repeated uh basically uh
being a show of force from the Iranian
side but beyond that of course Iran can
activate uh different components of its
so-called axis of resistance um the
houthis and Yemen who have also launched
long range missiles quite recently uh to
Israel uh but also pro-iranian militias
in Iraq and Syria uh uh retargeting U uh
the US military presence there and of
course not least Hezbollah in the north
of uh Israel but then again uh
potentially not to the extent of uh you
know the the I mean at the end of the
day the Dilemma remains um that uh Iran
has to uh show a kind of phas saving
response but then again it would be a
huge risk um to draw in the United
States uh into uh the Middle East War uh
and also um create a veritable Northern
front between Hezbollah and Israel at
the end of the which Iran may lose its
Crown Jewel Hezbollah let me just ask
you about Hamas and um Hezbollah their
their faith and trust in the Iranian
regime Ian is it it has to be shaken now
or or how do you see
it well there was some you know uh
shaking credibility all along um since
um October 7th because of Iranian
reluctance to strike
um you know Israel directly um so um
this particular credibility problem uh
amounted to the kind of Iranian direct
assault that we saw on April 13th uh so
again um yes it's a credibility problem
for the Islamic Republic both with its
inside supporter base but also most
notely within the axis of uh you know
the so-called axis of
resistance um uh but but the uh Iranians
um uh you know this credibility problem
uh has to be dealt with uh but then
again we we cannot forget that there is
a clear pattern of dependence uh
one-sidedly so that is to say that
Hezbollah and Hamas are the ones who are
dependent upon Tan's support and not
vice versa okay Ali F Nan director of
the center for Middle East and Global
Order we appreciate your time and your
analysis tonight thank you good seeing
you
again thank
[Music]
you with the background to hania's
killing is the war in Gaza between Hamas
and Israel the US has been pressuring
Israel to agree to a ceasefire but the
Israeli government has resisted ania's
death makes a ceasefire seem less likely
than ever nevertheless the Biden
Administration thinks that it's still
possible I want you to listen to what
the US National Security Council
spokesman John Kirby said about that
today we still believe there's a viable
process we still believe there's
interested counterparts and we still
believe that there are meetings and
discussions to be had we wouldn't have a
team over there right now if we didn't
believe that it was possible to to try
to uh gather gather together and push
this forward all right let's stay in
Washington now go to our correspondent
Janelle Dean she's following the story
for us so Janelle weakness and fear
let's start with weakness the fact that
Israel was able to possibly carry out
this assassination the fact that the US
was unable to to sway Israel to do
something differently US influence on
Israel is anything but strong is that
what you are hearing right now in
Washington well in a word Brent yes and
the fact that the US did not know about
this attack that's according to
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin and
that this attack was not coordinated by
Washington that kind of uh does seem a
bit more indicative of The Limited
influence that the US appears to have
but uh it's also worth noting out that
this idea that the US has un been unable
to exert influence on Israel effectively
it's worth pointing out that that has
been a discussion here uh for a longer
time the US for all its support of
Israel for its support of its military
campaign for all the Diplomatic cover
that the US has provided at the UN and
the UN Security Council the fact that it
stood by Israel uh in terms of helping
it fend off attacks uh from Iran the US
has been kind of like a passenger in
this journey and it's been unable to
press Iran into uh achieving certain
kind of goals such as uh appearing um
appearing more restrained or getting
more humanitarian Aid uh into Gaza so
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu was
just here last week he met with Biden he
met with Harris he spoke before Congress
and the White House also made it clear
then that what they wanted to see was uh
netan Yahoo's full backing of this uh
ceasefire hostage release deal he came
and went without having given that
backing and that clearly shows you that
he was not pressured to do that but what
everyone here is also aware of is that
Benjamin Netanyahu more than anything is
motivated by domestic concerns by
domestic pressures uh his personal
ambition perhaps his goal of staying in
power and that is a square that
Washington has not been able to Circle
yeah and now let's talk about the fear
the big fear is that the United States
will be drawn into a wider war in the
Middle East is there a sense in
Washington tonight that that is indeed
what could be happening
now I mean there is an argument to be
made that uh a wider regional conflict
was happening already you have the
houthi and the Red Sea you have Iranian
backed militias in Iraq and Syria and
these tensions between Israel and
Hezbollah but of course uh the fear that
uh this could motivate Iran and uh its
proxies to uh exact a very harsh
response of course and drag the us into
a wider uh into an even deeper conflict
of course uh that is a concern here now
for now the White House is maintaining
this line that a wider escalation uh is
not necessarily inevitable uh John Kirby
who uh whose uh quote we played there
earlier in the show he also said that
today but also worth noting that this is
a region that is uh full uh where the US
is uh is is very much represented the
White House has been saying that it
still sees a diplomatic solution as the
way forward for a more peaceful and
secure region but you can certainly tell
that nerves are on edge here yeah yeah
amazing though that they're they're
taking the positive spin on this um we
we'll see if that's where events indeed
take us Janelle in Washington Janelle
thanks for your reporting thank you